Title: Libre Graphics Meeting 2009
Date: 2009-03-07
Category: News
Authors: Wilber
Summary: For four years, the Libre Graphics Meeting has been the premiere conference for developers, users and supporters of free software graphics applications.

For four years, the [Libre Graphics Meeting](http://www.libregraphicsmeeting.org/) has been the premiere conference for developers, users and supporters of free software graphics applications. Developers from projects such as GIMP, Inkscape, Blender, Krita, Scribus, Hugin, the Open Clipart Library, and the Open Font Library gather to work on interoperability, shared standards, and new ideas. Work at prior LGMs has pushed the state of the art in important areas such as color management, cross-application sharing of brushes and other assets, and common formats.

The face-to-face meetings and opportunities for collaboration are important to developers, but LGM offers plenty for end users as well. Tutorials, talks, and birds-of-a-feather (BOF) meetings to help free software users get the most out of their applications fill out the LGM schedule, and demonstrations from artists showcase what is possible.

Click here to lend your support to: Support the Libre Graphics Meeting and make a donation at www.pledgie.com ! The fourth annual LGM will be held May 6–9, 2009 in Montreal, Canada at École Polytechnique. Donations will be used solely to help cover travel costs for volunteer developers and presenters. Last year’s campaign raised more than $12,000 dollars from individuals and corporations in the community. As with last year, pledges can be made online. Visit pledgie.com to [make your contribution](http://pledgie.com/campaigns/2926). All donations are tax deductible for US taxpayers. 