Title: GSoC2011 is Over
Date: 2011-09-17
Category: News
Authors: Alexandre Prokoudine

Google Summer of Code 2011 is over, and all of our students have successfully finished their respective projects. All of the code is available in Git repositories, but not all of it is going to be part of the next released versions of GEGL and GIMP. Here is why.

Both new tools, [Seamless Clone](http://lightningismyname.blogspot.com/2011/09/video-demo-of-my-gsoc-project.html) and [Warp Transform](http://pellelatarte.fr/en/2011/07/gimp-warp-tool-cest-la-mi-parcours/), as well as new size entry widget are too late to become part of 2.8. We are planning to make them part of 2.10, when they are better tested for reliability and usability. The OpenCL project needs more work to become part of GEGL's main development branch. However the project to port more [GIMP filters to GEGL operations](http://sasurobert.github.com/GSoC-2011/) is already part of master branch in GEGL and will be available in the next version of GEGL.

Some of our students are taking a well deserved break from GSoC or are back to study, while others continue hacking on their projects. Michael Muré recently started work on undo/redo support in the Warp Transform tool and works now on extending GEGL's capabilities regarding transformations. Barak Itkin continues working on his Seamless Paste tool and intends to make it usable with larger images as well as fix some bugs and make it more flexible. Victor Oliveira keep working on his OpenCL/GEGL project as well.