Title: GIMP 2.7.3 Released
Date: 2011-08-22
Category: News
Authors: Alexandre Prokoudine

We are pleased to announce availability of a new development version that brings us closer to GIMP 2.8. This version is packed with important new features and improvements.

The most visible changes in 2.7.3 are the fully working single-window mode, including working session management, and the introduction of a new hybrid spinbutton/scale widget which takes less space in dockable dialogs.

For a complete list of changes since 2.7.2 please refer to [NEWS](//developer.gimp.org/NEWS) page, while the [release notes](//www.gimp.org/release-notes/gimp-2.7.html) summarize changes in the whole 2.7.x series.

Please note that the whole 2.7.x series of versions is considered unstable and is not recommended for use in production even though it might just work for you. Our intention is to make development versions available for passionate users who can provide useful feedback to help us fix bugs and streamline implementation of some of the new features. The upcoming v2.8 also introduces a huge amount of API deprecations and additions that have the potential to break existing 3rd party scripts and plug-ins. Please file bugs for all plug-ins and scripts that do work in v2.6, but don't work in 2.7.3. A migration guide for developers will be provided when v2.8 is out.

There is still a lot of work to do on v2.8. Please refer to [this](https://web.archive.org/web/20120801115204/http://tasktaste.com/projects/Enselic/gimp-2-8) page to find out what the current estimation of v2.8 release is, and what bugs you can help us fixing to make the new stable version happen sooner.
