Title: GIMP 2.6.12 Released – The Final 2.6 Release
Date: 2012-02-01
Category: News
Authors: Alexandre Prokoudine

GIMP 2.6.12 is a bug-fix release in the stable GIMP 2.6 series. Its purpose is mostly to wrap up all fixes that have piled up since 2.6.11 into a last release in the stable 2.6 series before we switch to 2.8. Please have a look at the [NEWS](//developer.gimp.org/NEWS-2.6) file for a detailed list of changes.

The source can be downloaded from [ftp.gimp.org](http://gimp.org/downloads/#mirrors). Binary packages for various supported platforms should become available soon; please check the [Downloads](http://gimp.org/downloads/) section.

Just like you, we want to see v2.8 out in the wild as soon as possible, but there's still a number of regressions that block this important release.

On a lighter note, v2.8 is going to have an updated default set of brushes for painting and a set of tools presets (new feature in 2.8). The work was done by Ramón Miranda (GIMP Paint Studio project) and Guillermo Espertino.

Meanwhile there is a considerable progress with the GPU-side rendering project we announced in November. Victor Oliveira has brought OpenCL support on GEGL to a level where GIMP can load an image to a GPU and process it there with a brightness-contrast operation. This is only the beginning, but it opens quite a few possibilities.

We also maintain a rather active [Google+](https://plus.google.com/u/0/b/116634837115748851709/116634837115748851709/posts) page where we post various project related news, links to impressive work done with GIMP and so on.