Title: GIMP at Libre Graphics Meeting 2012
Date: 2012-02-27
Category: News
Authors: Alexandre Prokoudine

On May 2–5 we are attending [Libre Graphics Meeting 2012](http://libregraphicsmeeting.org/2012/), the annual conference for developers and users of free software for graphic design, photography and 3D modeling. The event is taking place in the beautiful city of Vienna, co-located with Linuxwochen.

The conference started in 2006 as an extended version of our annual developers meeting where we met Scribus and Inkscape teams to figure out how we can make our software work better together. Since then LGM has become the premiere event of the year for everyone who cares about free graphics software.

One of the achievements of the conference is OpenRaster, a raster file format that supports layers and blending modes and is intended for long-time archival. It is currently supported by GIMP, MyPaint, Krita and Pinta which makes it possible to use various tools on the same project file.

We have various ideas how else to co-operate with other teams and we tend to use LGM as another venue for our developers to meet each other and our usability team. However we'd like to notice that while your continuous support via donations enables us to travel to LGM, not all of the other teams are in this position. So if you care about co-operation between teams, we humbly ask you to [support the conference via Pledgie](http://pledgie.com/campaigns/16614). The money will be spent on getting other developers to the conference.

We expect the upcoming four days of Libre Graphics Meeting 2012 to be full of sparkling ideas, collaboration and, above all, fun. If you'd like to meet us or any other teams or even give a talk, you still have time to [register](http://libregraphicsmeeting.org/2012/registration/).