Title: GEGL 0.3.8 and babl 0.1.18 Released
Date: 2016-06-14
Category: News
Authors: Alexandre Prokoudine
Slug: gegl-0-3-8-babl-0-1-18-released
Summary: New version of GEGL and babl are out with new features, minor improvements, and fixes to accomodate upcoming GIMP 2.9.4.

New version of [GEGL](http://gegl.org/) and [babl](http://gegl.org/babl/) are out with new features, minor improvements, and fixes. These releases in particular are intended to accomodate upcoming GIMP 2.9.4 that depends on several important bugfixes from both babl and GEGL. However there have been some interesting new features.

First of all, now GEGL operations can report processing progress so that GIMP or e.g. GNOME Photos could correctly render progress indication. So far this is only used in two operations, gegl:cartoon and gegl:distance-transform. We expect to propagate this new feature to more operations in the coming releases.

Secondly, linear and cubic resamplers provide better default image quality at downscaling now. In terms of quality, the output is comparable to that of NoHalo and LoHalo samplers, but processing time is shorter.

Additionally, file handlers finally register MIME types for loaders and try to guess file types by analyzing file content before falling back to file extension detection. This makes the file loading routine a little smarter.

Finally, the 'gegl' binary keeps getting more features like simple video filtering and encoding audio alongside video.

For the first time in quite a while a new GEGL release contains no new ports of existing GIMP filters. This is because there have been no related contributions for the last few months. There is still a lot of work to do, and we greatly appreciate your help with getting more filters ready for non-destructive workflows.

The complete list of changes is available in the [NEWS](https://git.gnome.org/browse/gegl/tree/NEWS) file. Tarballs are up at [download.gimp.org/](http://download.gimp.org/).
