Title: GIMP 2.8.22 Released
Date: 2017-05-11
Category: News
Authors: Wilber
Slug: gimp-2-8-22-released
Summary: We are releasing GIMP 2.8.22 with various bug fixes.

We are releasing GIMP 2.8.22 with various bug fixes. 

<<<<<<< HEAD
All platforms will benefit from a change to the image window hierarchy in single window mode, which improves painting performance when certain GTK+ themes are used.

This version fixes an ancient CVE bug, [CVE-2007-3126](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2007-3126). Due to this bug, the ICO file import plug-in could be crashed by specially crafted image files. Our attempts to reproduce the bug failed with 2.8 and thus the impact had likely been minimal for years, but now it is gone for good.
=======
All platforms will benefit from a change to the image window hierarchy in single window mode, which improves painting performance of certain GTK+ themes are used.

This version fixes an ancient CVS bug, [CVE-2007-3126](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2007-3126). Our attempts to reproduce the bug as described there failed with 2.8 and thus the impact had likely been minimal for years, but now it is gone for good.
>>>>>>> Add GIMP 2.8.22 release news item

Users on the Apple macOS platforms will benefit from fixes for crashes during drag&drop and copy&paste operations. On the Microsoft Windows platforms, crashes encountered when using the color picker with special multi-screen setups are gone, and picking the actual color instead of black from anywhere on the screen should finally be possible.

Check out the full list of [fixed issues since 2.8.20](https://git.gnome.org/browse/gimp/plain/NEWS?h=GIMP_2_8_22).

<<<<<<< HEAD
The source code, the Microsoft Windows installer and the Apple Disk Image for GIMP 2.8.22 are available from our [downloads page](/downloads/); so yes, this time we made an effort to publish everything in one go :)
=======
The source code, the Microsoft Windows installer and the Apple Disk Image for GIMP 2.8.22 are available from our [downloads page](/downloads/); so yes, this time we made an effort to publish everything at the same time :)
>>>>>>> Add GIMP 2.8.22 release news item
